README.md, before:

![Python package](https://github.com/terrier-org/pyterrier/workflows/Python%20package/badge.svg) [![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/python-terrier.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/py/python-terrier)

# Pyterrier

A Python API for Terrier

# Installation

Easiest way to get started with Pyterrier is to use one of our Colab notebooks - look for the ![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg) badges below.

### Linux or Google Colab
1. `pip install --upgrade git+https://github.com/terrier-org/pyterrier.git#egg=python-terrier`
2. You may need to set JAVA_HOME environment variable if Pyjnius cannot find your Java installation.

### macOS

1. You need to hava Java installed. Pyjnius/PyTerrier will pick up the location automatically.
2. `pip install --upgrade git+https://github.com/terrier-org/pyterrier.git#egg=python-terrier`

### Windows
Pyterrier is not available for Windows because [pytrec_eval](https://github.com/cvangysel/pytrec_eval) [isn't available for Windows](https://github.com/cvangysel/pytrec_eval/issues/19). If you can compile & install pytrec_eval youself, it should work fine.

# Indexing

PyTerrier has a number of useful classes for creating indices:

 - You can create an index from TREC formatted collection using TRECCollectionIndexer.    
 - For TXT, PDF, Microsoft Word files, etc files you can use FilesIndexer.
 - For Pandas Dataframe you can use DFIndexer.
 - For any abitrary iterable dictionaries, you can use IterDictIndexer.

See examples in the [indexing notebook](examples/notebooks/indexing.ipynb) [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/terrier-org/pyterrier/blob/master/examples/notebooks/indexing.ipynb)

# Retrieval and Evaluation

```python
topics = pt.io.read_topics(topicsFile)
qrels = pt.io.read_qrels(qrelsFile)
BM25_br = pt.BatchRetrieve(index, controls={"wmodel": "BM25"})
res = BM25_br.transform(topics)
pt.Utils.evaluate(res, qrels, metrics = ['map'])
```

There is a worked example in the [retrieval and evaluation notebook](examples/notebooks/retrieval_and_evaluation.ipynb) [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/terrier-org/pyterrier/blob/master/examples/notebooks/retrieval_and_evaluation.ipynb)

# Experiment - Perform Retrieval and Evaluation with a single function
Pyterrier provides an experiment object, which allows to compare multiple retrieval approaches on the same queries & relevance assessments:

```python
pt.Experiment([BM25_br, PL2_br], topics, qrels, ["map", "ndcg"])
```

There is a worked example in the [experiment notebook](examples/notebooks/experiment.ipynb) [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/terrier-org/pyterrier/blob/master/examples/notebooks/experiment.ipynb)

# Pipelines

Pyterrier makes it easy to develop complex [retrieval pipelines](pipelines.md) using Python operators to combine different retrieval approaches. Our [example pipelines](pipeline_examples.md) show how to conduct various common use cases. Each retrieval approach is a transformer, having one key method, `transform()`, which takes a single Pandas dataframe as input, and returns another dataframe. For more information, see the [Pyterrier data model](datamodel.md).

# Learning to Rank

Complex learning to rank pipelines, including for learning-to-rank, can be constructed using Pyterrier's operator language. There are several worked examples in the [learning-to-rank notebook](examples/notebooks/ltr.ipynb) [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/terrier-org/pyterrier/blob/master/examples/notebooks/ltr.ipynb)

# Dataset API

Pyterrier allows simple access to standard information retrieval test collections through its dataset API, which can download the topics, qrels, corpus or, for some test collections, a ready-made Terrier index.

```python
topics = pt.datasets.get_dataset("trec-robust-2004").get_topics()
qrels = pt.datasets.get_dataset("trec-robust-2004").get_qrels()
pt.Experiment([BM25_br, PL2_br], topics, qrels, eval_metrics)
```

You can use `pt.datasets.list_datasets()` to see available test collections - if your favourite test collection is missing, [you can submit a Pull Request](https://github.com/terrier-org/pyterrier/pulls).

# Index API

All of the standard Terrier Index API can be access easily from Pyterrier. 

For instance, accessing term statistics is a single call on an index:
```python
index.getLexicon()["circuit"].getDocumentFrequency()
```

There are lots of examples in the [index API notebook](examples/notebooks/index_api.ipynb) [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/terrier-org/pyterrier/blob/master/examples/notebooks/index_api.ipynb)

# Open Source Licence

PyTerrier is subject to the terms detailed in the Mozilla Public License Version 2.0. The Mozilla Public License can be found in the file [LICENSE.txt](LICENSE.txt). By using this software, you have agreed to the licence.

# Citation Licence

The source and binary forms of PyTerrier are subject to the following citation license: 

By downloading and using PyTerrier, you agree to cite at the undernoted paper describing PyTerrier in any kind of material you produce where PyTerrier was used to conduct search or experimentation, whether be it a research paper, dissertation, article, poster, presentation, or documentation. By using this software, you have agreed to the citation licence.

Declarative Experimentation inInformation Retrieval using PyTerrier. Craig Macdonald and Nicola Tonellotto. In Proceedings of ICTIR 2020.

```bibtex
@inproceesings{
    author = {Craig Macdonald and Nicola Tonellotto},
    title = {Declarative Experimentation inInformation Retrieval using PyTerrier},
    booktitle = {Proceedings of ICTIR 2020},
    year = {2020}
}

```

# Credits

 - Alex Tsolov, University of Glasgow
 - Craig Macdonald, University of Glasgow
 - Nicola Tonellotto, University of Pisa
 - Arthur Câmara, Delft University
 - Alberto Ueda, Federal University of Minas Gerais
 - Sean MacAvaney, Georgetown University

Commit message:

added more details about pipelines and LTR

README.md, after:

![Python package](https://github.com/terrier-org/pyterrier/workflows/Python%20package/badge.svg) [![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/python-terrier.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/py/python-terrier)

# Pyterrier

A Python API for Terrier

# Installation

Easiest way to get started with Pyterrier is to use one of our Colab notebooks - look for the ![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg) badges below.

### Linux or Google Colab
1. `pip install --upgrade git+https://github.com/terrier-org/pyterrier.git#egg=python-terrier`
2. You may need to set JAVA_HOME environment variable if Pyjnius cannot find your Java installation.

### macOS

1. You need to hava Java installed. Pyjnius/PyTerrier will pick up the location automatically.
2. `pip install --upgrade git+https://github.com/terrier-org/pyterrier.git#egg=python-terrier`

### Windows
Pyterrier is not available for Windows because [pytrec_eval](https://github.com/cvangysel/pytrec_eval) [isn't available for Windows](https://github.com/cvangysel/pytrec_eval/issues/19). If you can compile & install pytrec_eval youself, it should work fine.

# Indexing

PyTerrier has a number of useful classes for creating indices:

 - You can create an index from TREC formatted collection using TRECCollectionIndexer.    
 - For TXT, PDF, Microsoft Word files, etc files you can use FilesIndexer.
 - For Pandas Dataframe you can use DFIndexer.
 - For any abitrary iterable dictionaries, you can use IterDictIndexer.

See examples in the [indexing notebook](examples/notebooks/indexing.ipynb) [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/terrier-org/pyterrier/blob/master/examples/notebooks/indexing.ipynb)

# Retrieval and Evaluation

```python
topics = pt.io.read_topics(topicsFile)
qrels = pt.io.read_qrels(qrelsFile)
BM25_br = pt.BatchRetrieve(index, controls={"wmodel": "BM25"})
res = BM25_br.transform(topics)
pt.Utils.evaluate(res, qrels, metrics = ['map'])
```

There is a worked example in the [retrieval and evaluation notebook](examples/notebooks/retrieval_and_evaluation.ipynb) [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/terrier-org/pyterrier/blob/master/examples/notebooks/retrieval_and_evaluation.ipynb)

# Experiment - Perform Retrieval and Evaluation with a single function
Pyterrier provides an experiment object, which allows to compare multiple retrieval approaches on the same queries & relevance assessments:

```python
pt.Experiment([BM25_br, PL2_br], topics, qrels, ["map", "ndcg"])
```

There is a worked example in the [experiment notebook](examples/notebooks/experiment.ipynb) [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/terrier-org/pyterrier/blob/master/examples/notebooks/experiment.ipynb)

# Pipelines

Pyterrier makes it easy to develop complex [retrieval pipelines](pipelines.md) using Python operators such as `>>` to chain different retrieval components. Each retrieval approach is a transformer, having one key method, `transform()`, which takes a single Pandas dataframe as input, and returns another dataframe. Two examples might encapsulate applying the sequential dependence model, or a query expansion process:
```python
sdm_bm25 = pt.rewrite.SDM() >> pt.BatchRetrieve(indexref, controls={"wmodel":"BM25"})
bo1_qe = BM25_br >> pt.rewrite.Bo1QueryExpansion() >> BM25_br
````
Our [example pipelines](pipeline_examples.md) show other common use cases. For more information, see the [Pyterrier data model](datamodel.md).

# Learning to Rank

Complex learning to rank pipelines, including for learning-to-rank, can be constructed using Pyterrier's operator language. For example, to combine two features and make them available for learning, we can use the `**` operator.
```python
two_features = BM25_br >> ( pt.BatchRetrieve(indexref, controls={"wmodel":"DirichletLM"}) ** pt.BatchRetrieve(indexref, controls={"wmodel":"PL2"}) )
```
There are several worked examples in the [learning-to-rank notebook](examples/notebooks/ltr.ipynb) [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/terrier-org/pyterrier/blob/master/examples/notebooks/ltr.ipynb). Some pipelines can be automatically optimised - more detail about pipeline optimisation are included in our ICTIR 2020 paper.

# Dataset API

Pyterrier allows simple access to standard information retrieval test collections through its dataset API, which can download the topics, qrels, corpus or, for some test collections, a ready-made Terrier index.

```python
topics = pt.datasets.get_dataset("trec-robust-2004").get_topics()
qrels = pt.datasets.get_dataset("trec-robust-2004").get_qrels()
pt.Experiment([BM25_br, PL2_br], topics, qrels, eval_metrics)
```

You can use `pt.datasets.list_datasets()` to see available test collections - if your favourite test collection is missing, [you can submit a Pull Request](https://github.com/terrier-org/pyterrier/pulls).

# Index API

All of the standard Terrier Index API can be access easily from Pyterrier. 

For instance, accessing term statistics is a single call on an index:
```python
index.getLexicon()["circuit"].getDocumentFrequency()
```

There are lots of examples in the [index API notebook](examples/notebooks/index_api.ipynb) [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/terrier-org/pyterrier/blob/master/examples/notebooks/index_api.ipynb)

# Open Source Licence

PyTerrier is subject to the terms detailed in the Mozilla Public License Version 2.0. The Mozilla Public License can be found in the file [LICENSE.txt](LICENSE.txt). By using this software, you have agreed to the licence.

# Citation Licence

The source and binary forms of PyTerrier are subject to the following citation license: 

By downloading and using PyTerrier, you agree to cite at the undernoted paper describing PyTerrier in any kind of material you produce where PyTerrier was used to conduct search or experimentation, whether be it a research paper, dissertation, article, poster, presentation, or documentation. By using this software, you have agreed to the citation licence.

Declarative Experimentation inInformation Retrieval using PyTerrier. Craig Macdonald and Nicola Tonellotto. In Proceedings of ICTIR 2020.

```bibtex
@inproceesings{
    author = {Craig Macdonald and Nicola Tonellotto},
    title = {Declarative Experimentation inInformation Retrieval using PyTerrier},
    booktitle = {Proceedings of ICTIR 2020},
    year = {2020}
}

```

# Credits

 - Alex Tsolov, University of Glasgow
 - Craig Macdonald, University of Glasgow
 - Nicola Tonellotto, University of Pisa
 - Arthur Câmara, Delft University
 - Alberto Ueda, Federal University of Minas Gerais
 - Sean MacAvaney, Georgetown University
