docs/experiments.rst, before:

Running Experiments
-------------------

PyTerrier aims to make it easy to conduct an information retrieval experiment, namely, to run a transformer 
pipeline over a set of queries, and evaluating the outcome using standard information retrieval evaluation 
metrics based on known relevant documents (obtained from a set relevance assessments, also known as *qrels*).
The evaluation metrics are calculated by the `pytrec_eval <https://github.com/cvangysel/pytrec_eval>`_ library,
a Python wrapper around the widely-used `trec_eval evaluation tool <https://github.com/usnistgov/trec_eval>`_.

The main way to achieve this is using `pt.Experiment()`.

API
========

.. autofunction:: pyterrier.Experiment()


Examples
========

Average Effectiveness
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Getting average effectiveness over a set of topics::

    dataset = pt.get_dataset("vaswani")
    # vaswani dataset provides an index, topics and qrels

    # lets generate two BRs to compare
    tfidf = pt.BatchRetrieve(dataset.get_index(), wmodel="TF_IDF")
    bm25 = pt.BatchRetrieve(dataset.get_index(), wmodel="BM25")

    pt.Experiment(
        [tfidf, bm25],
        dataset.get_topics(),
        dataset.get_qrels(),
        eval_metrics=["map", "recip_rank"]
    )

The returned dataframe is as follows:

.. include:: ./_includes/experiment-basic.rst

Each row represents one system. We can manually set the names of the systems, using the `names=` kwarg, as follows::

    pt.Experiment(
        [tfidf, bm25],
        dataset.get_topics(),
        dataset.get_qrels(),
        eval_metrics=["map", "recip_rank"],
        names=["TF_IDF", "BM25"]
    )

This produces dataframes that are more easily interpretable.

.. include:: ./_includes/experiment-names.rst

We can also reduce the number of decimal places reported using the `round=` kwarg, as follows::

    pt.Experiment(
        [tfidf, bm25],
        dataset.get_topics(),
        dataset.get_qrels(),
        eval_metrics=["map", "recip_rank"],
        round={"map" : 4, "recip_rank" : 3},
        names=["TF_IDF", "BM25"]
    )

The result is as follows:

.. include:: ./_includes/experiment-round.rst

Passing an integer value to `round=` (e.g. `round=3`) applies rounding to all evaluation measures.


Significance Testing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We can perform significance testing by specifying the index of which transformer we consider to be our baseline,
e.g. `baseline=0`::

    pt.Experiment(
        [tfidf, bm25],
        dataset.get_topics(),
        dataset.get_qrels(),
        eval_metrics=["map", "recip_rank"],
        names=["TF_IDF", "BM25"],
        baseline=0
    )

In this case, additional columns are returned for each measure, indicating 
the number of queries improved compared to the baseline, the number of queries
degraded, as well as the paired t-test p-value in the difference between each
row and the baseline row. NB: For the baseline, these values are NaN (not applicable).

.. include:: ./_includes/experiment-sig.rst

For this test collection, between the TF_IDF and BM25 weighting models, there is no 
significant difference observed in terms of MAP, but there is a significant different in terms of 
mean reciprocal rank (*p<0.05*). Indeed, while BM25 improves average precision for 46 queries 
over TF_IDF, it degrades it for 45; on the other hand, the rank of the first relevant document 
is improved for 16 queries by BM25 over TD_IDF.


Per-query Effectiveness
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Finally, if necessary, we can request per-query performances using the `perquery=True` kwarg::

    pt.Experiment(
        [tfidf, bm25],
        dataset.get_topics(),
        dataset.get_qrels(),
        eval_metrics=["map", "recip_rank"],
        names=["TF_IDF", "BM25"],
        perquery=True
    )

This provides a dataframe where each row is the performance of a given system for a give query on a particular evaluation measure.

.. include:: ./_includes/experiment-perq.rst

NB: For brevity, we only show the top 5 rows of the returned table.

Available Evaluation Measures
=============================

All `trec_eval <https://github.com/usnistgov/trec_eval>`_ evaluation measure are available. 
Often used measures, including the name that must be used, are:

 - Mean Average Precision (`map`).
 - Mean Reciprocal Rank (`recip_rank`).
 - Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (`ndcg`), or calculated at a given rank cutoff (e.g. `ndcg_cut_5`).
 - Number of queries (`num_q`) - not averaged.
 - Number of retrieved documents (`num_ret`) - not averaged.
 - Number of relevant documents (`num_rel`) - not averaged.
 - Number of relevant documents retrieved (`num_rel_ret`) - not averaged.
 - Interpolated recall precision curves (`iprec_at_recall`). This is family of measures, so requesting `iprec_at_recall` will output measurements for `iprec_at_recall_0.00`, `iprec_at_recall_0.10`, etc.
 - Precision at rank cutoff (e.g. `P_5`).
 - Recall (`recall`) will generate recall at different cutoffs, such as `recall_5`, etc.).
 - Mean response time (`mrt`) will report the average number of milliseconds to conduct a query (this is calculated by `pt.Experiment()` directly, not pytrec_eval).
 - trec_eval measure *families* such as `official`, `set` and `all_trec` will be expanded. These result in many measures being returned. For instance, asking for `official` results in the following (very wide) output reporting the usual default metrics of trec_eval:

.. include:: ./_includes/experiment-official.rst


See also a `list of common TREC eval measures <http://www.rafaelglater.com/en/post/learn-how-to-use-trec_eval-to-evaluate-your-information-retrieval-system>`_.

Commit message:

multiple testing correction in pt.Experiment, addresses #99 (PR #124)

docs/experiments.rst, after:

Running Experiments
-------------------

PyTerrier aims to make it easy to conduct an information retrieval experiment, namely, to run a transformer 
pipeline over a set of queries, and evaluating the outcome using standard information retrieval evaluation 
metrics based on known relevant documents (obtained from a set relevance assessments, also known as *qrels*).
The evaluation metrics are calculated by the `pytrec_eval <https://github.com/cvangysel/pytrec_eval>`_ library,
a Python wrapper around the widely-used `trec_eval evaluation tool <https://github.com/usnistgov/trec_eval>`_.

The main way to achieve this is using `pt.Experiment()`.

API
========

.. autofunction:: pyterrier.Experiment()


Examples
========

Average Effectiveness
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Getting average effectiveness over a set of topics::

    dataset = pt.get_dataset("vaswani")
    # vaswani dataset provides an index, topics and qrels

    # lets generate two BRs to compare
    tfidf = pt.BatchRetrieve(dataset.get_index(), wmodel="TF_IDF")
    bm25 = pt.BatchRetrieve(dataset.get_index(), wmodel="BM25")

    pt.Experiment(
        [tfidf, bm25],
        dataset.get_topics(),
        dataset.get_qrels(),
        eval_metrics=["map", "recip_rank"]
    )

The returned dataframe is as follows:

.. include:: ./_includes/experiment-basic.rst

Each row represents one system. We can manually set the names of the systems, using the `names=` kwarg, as follows::

    pt.Experiment(
        [tfidf, bm25],
        dataset.get_topics(),
        dataset.get_qrels(),
        eval_metrics=["map", "recip_rank"],
        names=["TF_IDF", "BM25"]
    )

This produces dataframes that are more easily interpretable.

.. include:: ./_includes/experiment-names.rst

We can also reduce the number of decimal places reported using the `round=` kwarg, as follows::

    pt.Experiment(
        [tfidf, bm25],
        dataset.get_topics(),
        dataset.get_qrels(),
        eval_metrics=["map", "recip_rank"],
        round={"map" : 4, "recip_rank" : 3},
        names=["TF_IDF", "BM25"]
    )

The result is as follows:

.. include:: ./_includes/experiment-round.rst

Passing an integer value to `round=` (e.g. `round=3`) applies rounding to all evaluation measures.


Significance Testing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We can perform significance testing by specifying the index of which transformer we consider to be our baseline,
e.g. `baseline=0`::

    pt.Experiment(
        [tfidf, bm25],
        dataset.get_topics(),
        dataset.get_qrels(),
        eval_metrics=["map", "recip_rank"],
        names=["TF_IDF", "BM25"],
        baseline=0
    )

In this case, additional columns are returned for each measure, indicating 
the number of queries improved compared to the baseline, the number of queries
degraded, as well as the paired t-test p-value in the difference between each
row and the baseline row. NB: For the baseline, these values are NaN (not applicable).

.. include:: ./_includes/experiment-sig.rst

For this test collection, between the TF_IDF and BM25 weighting models, there is no 
significant difference observed in terms of MAP, but there is a significant different in terms of 
mean reciprocal rank (*p<0.05*). Indeed, while BM25 improves average precision for 46 queries 
over TF_IDF, it degrades it for 45; on the other hand, the rank of the first relevant document 
is improved for 16 queries by BM25 over TD_IDF.

Further more, modern experimental convention suggests that it is important to correct for multiple
testing in the comparative evaluation of many IR systems. Experiments provides supported for the
multiple testing correction methods supported by the `statsmodels package <https://www.statsmodels.org/dev/generated/statsmodels.stats.multitest.multipletests.html#statsmodels.stats.multitest.multipletests>`_,
such as `Bonferroni`::

    pt.Experiment(
        [tfidf, bm25],
        dataset.get_topics(),
        dataset.get_qrels(),
        eval_metrics=["map"],
        names=["TF_IDF", "BM25"],
        baseline=0,
        correction='bonferroni'
    )

This adds two further columns for each measure, denoting if the null hypothesis can be rejected (e.g. `"map reject"`),
as well as the corrected p value (`"map p-value corrected"`), as shown below:

.. include:: ./_includes/experiment-sig-corr.rst

The table below summarises the multiple testing correction methods supported:

.. include:: ./_includes/experiment-corr-methods.rst

Any value in the Aliases column can be passed to Experiment's `correction=` kwarg.

Per-query Effectiveness
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Finally, if necessary, we can request per-query performances using the `perquery=True` kwarg::

    pt.Experiment(
        [tfidf, bm25],
        dataset.get_topics(),
        dataset.get_qrels(),
        eval_metrics=["map", "recip_rank"],
        names=["TF_IDF", "BM25"],
        perquery=True
    )

This provides a dataframe where each row is the performance of a given system for a give query on a particular evaluation measure.

.. include:: ./_includes/experiment-perq.rst

NB: For brevity, we only show the top 5 rows of the returned table.

Available Evaluation Measures
=============================

All `trec_eval <https://github.com/usnistgov/trec_eval>`_ evaluation measure are available. 
Often used measures, including the name that must be used, are:

 - Mean Average Precision (`map`).
 - Mean Reciprocal Rank (`recip_rank`).
 - Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (`ndcg`), or calculated at a given rank cutoff (e.g. `ndcg_cut_5`).
 - Number of queries (`num_q`) - not averaged.
 - Number of retrieved documents (`num_ret`) - not averaged.
 - Number of relevant documents (`num_rel`) - not averaged.
 - Number of relevant documents retrieved (`num_rel_ret`) - not averaged.
 - Interpolated recall precision curves (`iprec_at_recall`). This is family of measures, so requesting `iprec_at_recall` will output measurements for `iprec_at_recall_0.00`, `iprec_at_recall_0.10`, etc.
 - Precision at rank cutoff (e.g. `P_5`).
 - Recall (`recall`) will generate recall at different cutoffs, such as `recall_5`, etc.).
 - Mean response time (`mrt`) will report the average number of milliseconds to conduct a query (this is calculated by `pt.Experiment()` directly, not pytrec_eval).
 - trec_eval measure *families* such as `official`, `set` and `all_trec` will be expanded. These result in many measures being returned. For instance, asking for `official` results in the following (very wide) output reporting the usual default metrics of trec_eval:

.. include:: ./_includes/experiment-official.rst


See also a `list of common TREC eval measures <http://www.rafaelglater.com/en/post/learn-how-to-use-trec_eval-to-evaluate-your-information-retrieval-system>`_.
