docs/operators.rst, before:

Operators on Transformers
=========================

Part of the power of PyTerrier comes from the ease in which researchers can formulate complex retrieval pipelines. 
This is made possible by the operators available on Pyterrier's transformer objects. The following table summarises
the available operators:

============ =================================
 Operator    Meaning                           
============ =================================
`>>`         Then - chaining pipes            
`+`          Linear combination of scores            
`*`          Scalar factoring of scores         
`&`          Document Set Intersection              
`|`          Document Set Union         
`%`          Apply rank cutoff                  
`^`          Concatenate run with another       
`**`         Feature Union           
`~`          Cache transformer result              
============ =================================


Then (`>>`)
-------------------

Apply one transformation followed by another::

    #rewrites topics to include #1 etc
    sdm = pt.rewrite.SDM()
    br = BatchRetrieve(index, "DPH")

    res = br.transform( sdm.transform(topics))

We use `>>` as a shorthand for then (also called compose)::

    res = (sdm >> br).transform(topics)


**Example:**

Consider a topics dataframe as follows:

=== ===============
qid query 
=== ===============
q1  test query
=== ===============

Then the application of SDM() would produce:

=== =============================================
qid query 
=== =============================================
q1  test query #1(test query) #uw8(test query)   
=== =============================================

NB: In practice the query reformulation generated by SDM() is more complex, due to the presence of weights etc in the resulting query.

Then the final res dataframe would contain the results of applying BatchRetrieve on the rewritten queries, as follows:

=== ============================================= ===== ===== ====
qid query                                         docno score rank
=== ============================================= ===== ===== ====
q1  test query #1(test query) #uw8(test query)    d10   4     0
q1  test query #1(test query) #uw8(test query)    d04   3.8   1
=== ============================================= ===== ===== ====

NB: Then can also be used for retrieval and re-ranking pipelines, such as:: 

    pipeline = BatchRetrieve(index, "DPH") >> BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25")


Linear Combine and Scalar Factor (`+`, `*`)
-------------------------------------------

The linear combine (`+`) and scalar factor (`*`) operators allow the scores of 
different retrieval systems to be linearly combined (with weights).

Instead of the following Python::

    br_DPH = BatchRetrieve(index, "DPH")
    br_BM25 = BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25")

    res1 = br_DPH.trasnform(topics)
    res2 = br_BM25.trasnform(topics)
    res = res1.merge(res2, on=["qid", "docno"])
    res["score"] = 2 * res["score_x"] + res["score_y"]

We use binary `+` and `*` operators. This is natural, as it is intuitive to combine weighted retrieval functions using `+` and `*` ::

    br_DPH = BatchRetrieve(index, "DPH")
    br_BM25 = BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25")
    res = (2* br_DPH + br_BM25).transform(topics)


If the DPH and BM25 transformers would respectively return:

=== ===== ===== ====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== ====
q1  d10   2     0
q1  d12   1     1
=== ===== ===== ====

=== ===== ===== ====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== ====
q1  d10   4     0
q1  d01   3     1
=== ===== ===== ====

then the application of the transformer represented by the expression `(2* br_DPH + br_BM25)` would be:

=== ===== ===== =====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== =====
q1  d10   8     0 
q1  d01   3     1
q1  d12   2     2
=== ===== ===== =====

NB: Any documents not present in one  of the constituent rankings will contribute a score of 0 to the final score of that document.

Set Intersection and Intersection (`&`, `|`)
--------------------------------------------

The set that only includes documents that occur in the intersection (`&`)
and union (`|`) of both retrieval sets. Scores and ranks are not returned - hence,
the rankings documents would normally be re-scored::

    BM25_br = BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25")
    PL2_br = BatchRetrieve(index, "PL2")

    res_intersection = (BM25_br & PL2_br).transform(topics)
    res_union = (BM25_br | PL2_br).transform(topics)

**Examples:**

If the BM25 and PL2 pipelines would respectively return:

=== ===== ===== ====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== ====
q1  d10   4.3   0
q1  d12   4.1   1
=== ===== ===== ====

=== ===== ===== ====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== ====
q1  d10   4.3   0
q1  d01   3.9   1
=== ===== ===== ====

then the application of the set intersection operator (`&`) would result in a ranking
only containing documents appear in both transformers:

=== =====
qid docno
=== =====
q1  d10  
=== =====

and the application of the set union operator  (`|`) would return documents retrieved by either transformer:

=== =====
qid docno
=== =====
q1  d10  
q1  d12  
q1  d01  
=== =====

Note that, as these are set operators, there are no ranks and scores returned in the output. 


Rank Cutoff (`%`)
-----------------

The `%` operator is called rank cutoff, and limits the number of results for each query::

    pipe1 = pt.BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25") % 2

**Example:**

If a retrieval pipeline returns:

=== ===== ===== ====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== ====
q1  d10   4.3   0
q1  d12   4.1   1
q1  d05   3.9   2
q1  d03   3.5   3
q1  d01   2.5   4
=== ===== ===== ====

then the application of the rank cutoff operator would be:

=== ===== ===== ====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== ====
q1  d10   4.3   0
q1  d12   4.1   1
=== ===== ===== ====

Concatenate (`^`)
-----------------

Sometimes, we may only want to apply an expensive retrieval process on a few top-ranked documents, 
and fill up the rest of the ranking with the rest of the documents (removing duplicates). We can 
do that using the concatenate operator. Concretely, in the example below, `alldocs` is our 
candidate set, of say 1000 documents per query. We re-rank the top 3 documents for each query 
using `ExpensiveReranker()`, in a pipeline called `topdocs`. We then use the concatenate operator 
(`^`) to append the remaining documents from alldocs, such that they have scores and ranks adjusted
to appear just after the documents obtained from the `topdocs` pipeline::

    alldocs = BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25")
    topdocs = alldocs % 3 >> ExpensiveReranker()
    finaldocs = topdocs ^ alldocs

**Example:**

If `alldocs` returns:

=== ===== ===== ====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== ====
q1  d10   4.3   0
q1  d12   4.1   1
q1  d05   3.9   2
q1  d03   3.5   3
q1  d01   2.5   4
=== ===== ===== ====

Then alldocs would compute scores on the top 3 ranked documents (d10, d12, d05). After applying
ExpensiveReranker() to score and re-ranked these 3 documents, topdocs could be as follows:

=== ===== ===== ====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== ====
q1  d05   1.0   0
q1  d10   0.9   1
q1  d12   0.8   2
=== ===== ===== ====

Then finaldocs would be:

=== ===== ======= ====
qid docno score   rank
=== ===== ======= ====
q1  d05   1.0     0
q1  d10   0.9     1
q1  d12   0.8     2
q1  d03   0.7999  3
q1  d01   -0.2001 4
=== ===== ======= ====

Note that score of d03 is adjusted to appear just under the last ranked document from topdocs (we use a small value of epsilon=0.0001)
as the minimum difference between the least ranked document from topdocs and the highest remaining document from alldocs. The relative
ordering of documents from alldocs is unchanged, but the gaps between their scores are maintained, so the difference between d03 and d01
is a score delta of -1 in both alldocs and finaldocs. 

Feature Union (`**`)
--------------------

Here we take one system, e.g. DPH, to get an initial candidate set, then add more systems as features.

The Python would have looked like::

    sample_br = BatchRetrieve(index, "DPH")
    BM25F_br = BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25F")
    PL2F_br = BatchRetrieve(index, "PL2F")

    sampleRes = sample_br.transform(topics)
    # assumes sampleRes contains the queries
    BM25F_res = BM25F_br.transform(sampleRes)
    PL2F_res = PL2F_br.transform(sampleRes)

    final_res = BM25F_res.join(PL2F_res, on=["qid", "docno"])
    final_res["features"] = np.stack(final_res["features_x"], final_res["features_y"])


Instead, we use `**` to denote feature-union::

    sample_br = BatchRetrieve(index, "DPH")
    BM25F_br = BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25F")
    PL2F_br = BatchRetrieve(index, "PL2F")

    # ** is the feature union operator. It requires a candidate document set as input 
    (BM25F_br ** PL2F_br)).transform(sample_br.transform(topics))
    # or combined with the then operator, >>
    (sample_br >> (BM25F_br ** PL2F_br)).transform(topics)

NB: Feature union expects the documents being returned by each side of the union to be identical.
It will produce a warning if they are not identical. Documents not returned will obtain a score of 0
for that feature.

**Example:**

For example, consider that sample_br returns a ranking as follows:

=== ===== ===== ====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== ====
q1  d10   4.3   0
=== ===== ===== ====

Further, for document d10, BM25F and PL2F return scores respectively of 4.9 and 13.0. The application
of the feature union operator above would be a ranking with features as follows:

=== ===== ===== ==== ===========
qid docno score rank features
=== ===== ===== ==== ===========
q1  d10   4.3   0    [4.9, 13.0]
=== ===== ===== ==== ===========

More information can be found in the learning-to-rank documentation (:ref:`pyterrier.ltr`).

Caching (`~`)
-------------

Some transformers are expensive to apply. For instance, we might find ourselves repeatedly running 
our BM25 baseline. We can request Pyterrier to _cache_ the outcome of a transformer for a given
qid by using the unary `~` operator.

Consider the following example::

    from pyterrier import BatchRetrieve, Experiment
    firstpass = BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25")
    reranker = ~firstpass >> BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25F")
    Experiment([~firstpass, ~reranker], topics, qrels)

In this example, `firstpass` is cached when it is used in the Experiment evaluation, as well as when it is used in 
the reranker. We also cache the outcome of the Experiment, so that another evaluation will be faster.

By default, Pyterrier caches results to `~/.pyterrier/transformer_cache/`.

Commit message:

some clarifications on operator precendence, fix typo

docs/operators.rst, after:

Operators on Transformers
=========================

Part of the power of PyTerrier comes from the ease in which researchers can formulate complex retrieval pipelines. 
This is made possible by the operators available on Pyterrier's transformer objects. The following table summarises
the available operators:

============ =================================
 Operator    Meaning                           
============ =================================
`>>`         Then - chaining pipes            
`+`          Linear combination of scores            
`*`          Scalar factoring of scores         
`&`          Document Set Intersection              
`|`          Document Set Union         
`%`          Apply rank cutoff                  
`^`          Concatenate run with another       
`**`         Feature Union           
`~`          Cache transformer result              
============ =================================

NB: These operators retain their default Python operator precedence - that may not be aligned with your expectations
in a PyTerrier context (e.g. `&` is higher than `>>`). 

Then (`>>`)
-------------------

Apply one transformation followed by another::

    #rewrites topics to include #1 etc
    sdm = pt.rewrite.SDM()
    br = BatchRetrieve(index, "DPH")

    res = br.transform( sdm.transform(topics))

We use `>>` as a shorthand for then (also called compose)::

    res = (sdm >> br).transform(topics)


**Example:**

Consider a topics dataframe as follows:

=== ===============
qid query 
=== ===============
q1  test query
=== ===============

Then the application of SDM() would produce:

=== =============================================
qid query 
=== =============================================
q1  test query #1(test query) #uw8(test query)   
=== =============================================

NB: In practice the query reformulation generated by SDM() is more complex, due to the presence of weights etc in the resulting query.

Then the final res dataframe would contain the results of applying BatchRetrieve on the rewritten queries, as follows:

=== ============================================= ===== ===== ====
qid query                                         docno score rank
=== ============================================= ===== ===== ====
q1  test query #1(test query) #uw8(test query)    d10   4     0
q1  test query #1(test query) #uw8(test query)    d04   3.8   1
=== ============================================= ===== ===== ====

NB: Then can also be used for retrieval and re-ranking pipelines, such as:: 

    pipeline = BatchRetrieve(index, "DPH") >> BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25")


Linear Combine and Scalar Factor (`+`, `*`)
-------------------------------------------

The linear combine (`+`) and scalar factor (`*`) operators allow the scores of 
different retrieval systems to be linearly combined (with weights).

Instead of the following Python::

    br_DPH = BatchRetrieve(index, "DPH")
    br_BM25 = BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25")

    res1 = br_DPH.trasnform(topics)
    res2 = br_BM25.trasnform(topics)
    res = res1.merge(res2, on=["qid", "docno"])
    res["score"] = 2 * res["score_x"] + res["score_y"]

We use binary `+` and `*` operators. This is natural, as it is intuitive to combine weighted retrieval functions using `+` and `*` ::

    br_DPH = BatchRetrieve(index, "DPH")
    br_BM25 = BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25")
    res = (2* br_DPH + br_BM25).transform(topics)


If the DPH and BM25 transformers would respectively return:

=== ===== ===== ====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== ====
q1  d10   2     0
q1  d12   1     1
=== ===== ===== ====

=== ===== ===== ====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== ====
q1  d10   4     0
q1  d01   3     1
=== ===== ===== ====

then the application of the transformer represented by the expression `(2* br_DPH + br_BM25)` would be:

=== ===== ===== =====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== =====
q1  d10   8     0 
q1  d01   3     1
q1  d12   2     2
=== ===== ===== =====

NB: Any documents not present in one  of the constituent rankings will contribute a score of 0 to the final score of that document.

Set Intersection and Union (`&`, `|`)
-------------------------------------

The set that only includes documents that occur in the intersection (`&`)
and union (`|`) of both retrieval sets. Scores and ranks are not returned - hence,
the rankings documents would normally be re-scored::

    BM25_br = BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25")
    PL2_br = BatchRetrieve(index, "PL2")

    res_intersection = (BM25_br & PL2_br).transform(topics)
    res_union = (BM25_br | PL2_br).transform(topics)

**Examples:**

If the BM25 and PL2 pipelines would respectively return:

=== ===== ===== ====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== ====
q1  d10   4.3   0
q1  d12   4.1   1
=== ===== ===== ====

=== ===== ===== ====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== ====
q1  d10   4.3   0
q1  d01   3.9   1
=== ===== ===== ====

then the application of the set intersection operator (`&`) would result in a ranking
only containing documents appear in both transformers:

=== =====
qid docno
=== =====
q1  d10  
=== =====

and the application of the set union operator  (`|`) would return documents retrieved by either transformer:

=== =====
qid docno
=== =====
q1  d10  
q1  d12  
q1  d01  
=== =====

Note that, as these are set operators, there are no ranks and scores returned in the output. 


Rank Cutoff (`%`)
-----------------

The `%` operator is called rank cutoff, and limits the number of results for each query::

    pipe1 = pt.BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25") % 2

**Example:**

If a retrieval pipeline returns:

=== ===== ===== ====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== ====
q1  d10   4.3   0
q1  d12   4.1   1
q1  d05   3.9   2
q1  d03   3.5   3
q1  d01   2.5   4
=== ===== ===== ====

then the application of the rank cutoff operator would be:

=== ===== ===== ====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== ====
q1  d10   4.3   0
q1  d12   4.1   1
=== ===== ===== ====

Concatenate (`^`)
-----------------

Sometimes, we may only want to apply an expensive retrieval process on a few top-ranked documents, 
and fill up the rest of the ranking with the rest of the documents (removing duplicates). We can 
do that using the concatenate operator. Concretely, in the example below, `alldocs` is our 
candidate set, of say 1000 documents per query. We re-rank the top 3 documents for each query 
using `ExpensiveReranker()`, in a pipeline called `topdocs`. We then use the concatenate operator 
(`^`) to append the remaining documents from alldocs, such that they have scores and ranks adjusted
to appear just after the documents obtained from the `topdocs` pipeline::

    alldocs = BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25")
    topdocs = alldocs % 3 >> ExpensiveReranker()
    finaldocs = topdocs ^ alldocs

**Example:**

If `alldocs` returns:

=== ===== ===== ====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== ====
q1  d10   4.3   0
q1  d12   4.1   1
q1  d05   3.9   2
q1  d03   3.5   3
q1  d01   2.5   4
=== ===== ===== ====

Then alldocs would compute scores on the top 3 ranked documents (d10, d12, d05). After applying
ExpensiveReranker() to score and re-ranked these 3 documents, topdocs could be as follows:

=== ===== ===== ====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== ====
q1  d05   1.0   0
q1  d10   0.9   1
q1  d12   0.8   2
=== ===== ===== ====

Then finaldocs would be:

=== ===== ======= ====
qid docno score   rank
=== ===== ======= ====
q1  d05   1.0     0
q1  d10   0.9     1
q1  d12   0.8     2
q1  d03   0.7999  3
q1  d01   -0.2001 4
=== ===== ======= ====

Note that score of d03 is adjusted to appear just under the last ranked document from topdocs (we use a small value of epsilon=0.0001)
as the minimum difference between the least ranked document from topdocs and the highest remaining document from alldocs. The relative
ordering of documents from alldocs is unchanged, but the gaps between their scores are maintained, so the difference between d03 and d01
is a score delta of -1 in both alldocs and finaldocs. 

Feature Union (`**`)
--------------------

Here we take one system, e.g. DPH, to get an initial candidate set, then add more systems as features.

The Python would have looked like::

    sample_br = BatchRetrieve(index, "DPH")
    BM25F_br = BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25F")
    PL2F_br = BatchRetrieve(index, "PL2F")

    sampleRes = sample_br.transform(topics)
    # assumes sampleRes contains the queries
    BM25F_res = BM25F_br.transform(sampleRes)
    PL2F_res = PL2F_br.transform(sampleRes)

    final_res = BM25F_res.join(PL2F_res, on=["qid", "docno"])
    final_res["features"] = np.stack(final_res["features_x"], final_res["features_y"])


Instead, we use `**` to denote feature-union::

    sample_br = BatchRetrieve(index, "DPH")
    BM25F_br = BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25F")
    PL2F_br = BatchRetrieve(index, "PL2F")

    # ** is the feature union operator. It requires a candidate document set as input 
    (BM25F_br ** PL2F_br)).transform(sample_br.transform(topics))
    # or combined with the then operator, >>
    (sample_br >> (BM25F_br ** PL2F_br)).transform(topics)

NB: Feature union expects the documents being returned by each side of the union to be identical.
It will produce a warning if they are not identical. Documents not returned will obtain a score of 0
for that feature.

**Example:**

For example, consider that sample_br returns a ranking as follows:

=== ===== ===== ====
qid docno score rank
=== ===== ===== ====
q1  d10   4.3   0
=== ===== ===== ====

Further, for document d10, BM25F and PL2F return scores respectively of 4.9 and 13.0. The application
of the feature union operator above would be a ranking with features as follows:

=== ===== ===== ==== ===========
qid docno score rank features
=== ===== ===== ==== ===========
q1  d10   4.3   0    [4.9, 13.0]
=== ===== ===== ==== ===========

More information can be found in the learning-to-rank documentation (:ref:`pyterrier.ltr`).

Caching (`~`)
-------------

Some transformers are expensive to apply. For instance, we might find ourselves repeatedly running 
our BM25 baseline. We can request Pyterrier to _cache_ the outcome of a transformer for a given
qid by using the unary `~` operator.

Consider the following example::

    from pyterrier import BatchRetrieve, Experiment
    firstpass = BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25")
    reranker = ~firstpass >> BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25F")
    Experiment([~firstpass, ~reranker], topics, qrels)

In this example, `firstpass` is cached when it is used in the Experiment evaluation, as well as when it is used in 
the reranker. We also cache the outcome of the Experiment, so that another evaluation will be faster.

By default, Pyterrier caches results to `~/.pyterrier/transformer_cache/`.
