docs/terrier-indexing.rst, before:

Terrier Indexing
----------------

PyTerrier has a number of useful classes for creating Terrier indices, which can be used for retrieval, query expansion, etc.

Indexer Classes
===============

There are four indexer classes:

- You can create an index from TREC-formatted files, from a TREC test collection, using ``TRECCollectionIndexer``.
- For indexing TXT, PDF, Microsoft Word files, etc files you can use ``FilesIndexer``.
- For any abitrary iterable dictionaries, or a Pandas Dataframes, you can use ``IterDictIndexer``.

There are also different types of indexing supported in Terrier that are exposed in PyTerrier. We explain both the indexing types and the indexer classes below, with examples. Further worked examples of indexing are provided in the `example indexing notebook <https://github.com/terrier-org/pyterrier/blob/master/examples/notebooks/indexing.ipynb>`_.

TerrierIndexer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All indexer classes extend ``TerrierIndexer``. Common indexer contrustor arguments for all four indexers are shown below.

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.terrier.TerrierIndexer

TRECCollectionIndexer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.terrier.TRECCollectionIndexer
   :members: index

Example indexing the TREC WT2G corpus::

    import pyterrier as pt
    # list of filenames to index
    files = pt.io.find_files("/path/to/WT2G/wt2g-corpus/")

    # build the index
    indexer = pt.TRECCollectionIndexer("./wt2g_index", verbose=True, blocks=False)
    indexref = indexer.index(files)
    
    # load the index, print the statistics
    index = pt.IndexFactory.of(indexref)
    print(index.getCollectionStatistics().toString())


FilesIndexer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.terrier.FilesIndexer
   :members: index


IterDictIndexer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.terrier.IterDictIndexer
   :members: index

**Examples using IterDictIndexer**

An iterdict can just be a list of dictionaries::

    docs = [ { 'docno' : 'doc1', 'text' : 'a b c' }  ]
    iter_indexer = pt.IterDictIndexer("./index", meta={'docno': 20, 'text': 4096})
    indexref1 = iter_indexer.index(docs)

A dataframe can also be used, virtue of its ``.to_dict()`` method::

    df = pd.DataFrame([['doc1', 'a b c']], columns=['docno', 'text'])
    iter_indexer = pt.IterDictIndexer("./index")
    indexref2 = indexer.index(df.to_dict(orient="records"))

However, the main power of using IterDictIndexer is for processing indefinite iterables, such as those returned by generator functions.
For example, the tsv file of the MSMARCO Passage Ranking corpus can be indexed as follows::

    dataset = pt.get_dataset("trec-deep-learning-passages")
    def msmarco_generate():
        with pt.io.autoopen(dataset.get_corpus()[0], 'rt') as corpusfile:
            for l in corpusfile:
                docno, passage = l.split("\t")
                yield {'docno' : docno, 'text' : passage}
    
    iter_indexer = pt.IterDictIndexer("./passage_index", meta={'docno': 20, 'text': 4096})
    indexref3 = iter_indexer.index(msmarco_generate())

IterDictIndexer can be used in connection with :ref:`indexing_pipelines`.

Similarly, indexing of JSONL files is similarly a few lines of Python::

    def iter_file(filename):
      import json
      with open(filename, 'rt') as file:
        for l in file:
          # assumes that each line contains 'docno', 'text' attributes
          # yields a dictionary for each json line 
          yield json.loads(l)

    indexref4 = pt.IterDictIndexer("./index", meta={'docno': 20, 'text': 4096}).index(iter_file("/path/to/file.jsonl"))
  
NB: Use ``pt.io.autoopen()`` as a drop-in replacement for ``open()`` that supports files compressed by gzip etc.

**Indexing TREC-formatted files using IterDictIndexer**

If you have TREC-formatted files that you wish to use with an IterDictIndexer-like indexer, ``pt.index.treccollection2textgen()`` can be used
as a helper function to aid in parsing such files.

.. autofunction:: pyterrier.terrier.treccollection2textgen

Example using Indexing Pipelines::

    files = pt.io.find_files("/path/to/Disk45")
    gen = pt.index.treccollection2textgen(files)
    indexer = pt.text.sliding() >> pt.IterDictIndexer("./index45")
    index = indexer.index(gen)

**Threading**

On UNIX-based systems, IterDictIndexer can also perform multi-threaded indexing::

    iter_indexer = pt.IterDictIndexer("./passage_index_8", meta={'docno': 20, 'text': 4096}, threads=8)
    indexref6 = iter_indexer.index(msmarco_generate())

Note that the resulting index ordering with multiple threads is non-deterministic; if you need 
deterministic behavior you must index in single-threaded mode. Furthermore, indexing can only go
as quickly as the document iterator, so to take full advantage of multi-threaded indexing, you 
will need to keep the iterator function light-weight. Many datasets provide a fast corpus iteration 
function (``get_corpus_iter()``), see more information in the :ref:`datasets`.

Indexing Configuration
======================

Our aim is to expose all conventional Terrier indexing configuration through PyTerrier, for instance as constructor arguments
to the Indexer classes. However, as Terrier is a legacy platform, some changes will take time to integrate into Terrier. 
Moreover, the manner of the configuration needed varies a little between the Indexer classes. In the following, we list common
indexing configurations, and how to apply them when indexing using PyTerrier, noting any differences betweeen the Indexer classes.

**Choice of Indexer**

Terrier has three different types of indexer. The choice of indexer is exposed using the ``type`` kwarg 
to the indexer class. The indexer type can be set using the ``IndexingType`` enum.

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.terrier.IndexingType
   :inherited-members: CLASSIC, SINGLEPASS, MEMORY

**Stemming configuation or stopwords**

The default Terrier indexing configuration is to apply an English stopword list, and Porter's stemmer. You can configure this using the ``stemmer`` and ``stopwords`` kwargs for the various indexers::

    indexer = pt.IterDictIndexer(stemmer='SpanishSnowballStemmer', stopwords=None)

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.terrier.TerrierStemmer
   :inherited-members: 

See also the `org.terrier.terms <http://terrier.org/docs/current/javadoc/org/terrier/terms/package-summary.html>`_ package for a list of 
the available term pipeline objects provided by Terrier.

Similarly the use of Terrier's English stopword list can be disabled using the ``stopwords`` kwarg.

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.terrier.TerrierStopwords
   :inherited-members: 

A custom stopword list can be set by setting the ``stopwords`` kwarg to a list of words::

    indexer = pt.IterDictIndexer("./index", stopwords=['a', 'an', 'the'])

**Languages and Tokenisation**

Similarly, the choice of tokeniser can be controlled in the indexer constructor using the ``tokeniser`` kwarg. 
`EnglishTokeniser <http://terrier.org/docs/current/javadoc/org/terrier/indexing/tokenisation/EnglishTokeniser.html>`_ is the 
default tokeniser. Other tokenisers are listed in  `org.terrier.indexing.tokenisation <http://terrier.org/docs/current/javadoc/org/terrier/indexing/tokenisation/package-summary.html>`_ 
package. For instance, its common to use `UTFTokeniser` when indexing non-English text::

    indexer = pt.IterDictIndexer(stemmer=None, stopwords=None, tokeniser="UTFTokeniser")

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.terrier.TerrierTokeniser
   :inherited-members: 


**Positions (aka blocks)** 

All indexer classes expose a `blocks` boolean constructor argument to allow position information to be recoreded in the index. Defaults to False, i.e. positions are not recorded.


**Fields**

Fields refers to storing the frequency of a terms occurrence in different parts of a document, e.g. title vs body vs anchor text. In the IterDictIndexer, fields are set in the `index()` method; otherwise the `"FieldTags.process"` property must be set. See the Terrier `indexing documentation on fields <https://github.com/terrier-org/terrier-core/blob/5.x/doc/configure_indexing.md#fields>`_ for more information. 

**Changing the tags parsed by TREC Collection** 

Use the relevant properties listed in the Terrier `indexing documentation <https://github.com/terrier-org/terrier-core/blob/5.x/doc/configure_indexing.md#basic-indexing-setup>`_.

**MetaIndex configuration** 

Metadata refers to the arbitrary strings associated to each document recorded in a Terrier index. These can range from the `"docno"` attribute of each document, as used to support experimentation, to other attributes such as the URL of the documents, or even the raw text of the document. Indeed, storing the raw text of each document is a trick often used when applying additional re-rankers such as BERT (see `pyterrier_bert <https://github.com/cmacdonald/pyterrier_bert>`_ for more information on integrating PyTerrier with BERT-based re-rankers). Indexers now expose `meta` and `meta_tags` constructor kwarg to make this easier.

**Reverse MetaIndex configuration** 

On occasion, there is a need to lookup up documents in a Terrier index based on their metadata, e.g. "docno". The `meta_reverse` constructor kwarg allows meta keys that support reverse lookup to be specified.


Pretokenised
============

Sometimes you want more fine-grained control over the tokenisation directly within PyTerrier. In this case, each document to be indexed can contain a dictionary of pre-tokenised text and their counts. This works if the `pretokenised` flag is set to True at indexing time::

    iter_indexer = pt.IterDictIndexer("./pretokindex", meta={'docno': 20}, threads=1, pretokenised=True)
    indexref6 = iter_indexer.index([
        {'docno' : 'd1', 'toks' : {'a' : 1, '##2' : 2}},
        {'docno' : 'd2', 'toks' : {'a' : 2, '##2' : 1}}
    ])

This allows tokenisation using, for instance, the `HuggingFace tokenizers <https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/fast_tokenizers>`_::

    iter_indexer = pt.IterDictIndexer("./pretokindex", meta={'docno': 20}, pretokenised=True)
    from transformers import AutoTokenizer
    from collections import Counter

    tok = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("bert-base-uncased")

    # This creates a new column called 'toks', where each row contains 
    # a dictionary of the BERT WordPiece tokens of the 'text' column.
    # This simple example tokenises one row at a time, this could be  
    # made more efficient to utilise batching support in the tokeniser. 
    token_row_apply = pt.apply.toks(lambda row: Counter(tok.tokenize(row['text'])))

    index_pipe = token_row_apply >> iter_indexer
    indexref = index_pipe.index([
        {'docno' : 'd1', 'text' : 'do goldfish grow?'},
        {'docno' : 'd2', 'text' : ''}
    ])

At retrieval time, WordPieces that contain special characters (e.g. `'##w'` `'[SEP]'`) need to be encoded so as to avoid Terrier's tokeniser. 
We use ``pt.rewrite.tokenise()`` to apply a tokeniser to the query, setting ``matchop`` to True, such that ``pt.terrier.Retriever.matchop()`` 
is called to ensure that rewritten query terms are properly encoded::

    br = pt.terrier.Retriever(indexref)
    tok = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("bert-base-uncased")
    query_toks = pt.rewrite.tokenise(tok.tokenize, matchop=True)
    retr_pipe = query_toks >> br

Commit message:

terrier.IterDictIndexer doesn't create a field-index when not requested (#525)
---------
Co-authored-by: Sean MacAvaney <sean.macavaney@gmail.com>

docs/terrier-indexing.rst, after:

Terrier Indexing
----------------

PyTerrier has a number of useful classes for creating Terrier indices, which can be used for retrieval, query expansion, etc.

Indexer Classes
===============

There are four indexer classes:

- You can create an index from TREC-formatted files, from a TREC test collection, using ``TRECCollectionIndexer``.
- For indexing TXT, PDF, Microsoft Word files, etc files you can use ``FilesIndexer``.
- For any abitrary iterable dictionaries, or a Pandas Dataframes, you can use ``IterDictIndexer``.

There are also different types of indexing supported in Terrier that are exposed in PyTerrier. We explain both the indexing types and the indexer classes below, with examples. Further worked examples of indexing are provided in the `example indexing notebook <https://github.com/terrier-org/pyterrier/blob/master/examples/notebooks/indexing.ipynb>`_.

TerrierIndexer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All indexer classes extend ``TerrierIndexer``. Common indexer contrustor arguments for all four indexers are shown below.

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.terrier.TerrierIndexer

TRECCollectionIndexer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.terrier.TRECCollectionIndexer
   :members: index

Example indexing the TREC WT2G corpus::

    import pyterrier as pt
    # list of filenames to index
    files = pt.io.find_files("/path/to/WT2G/wt2g-corpus/")

    # build the index
    indexer = pt.TRECCollectionIndexer("./wt2g_index", verbose=True, blocks=False)
    indexref = indexer.index(files)
    
    # load the index, print the statistics
    index = pt.IndexFactory.of(indexref)
    print(index.getCollectionStatistics().toString())


FilesIndexer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.terrier.FilesIndexer
   :members: index


IterDictIndexer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.terrier.IterDictIndexer
   :members: index

**Examples using IterDictIndexer**

An iterdict can just be a list of dictionaries::

    docs = [ { 'docno' : 'doc1', 'text' : 'a b c' }  ]
    iter_indexer = pt.IterDictIndexer("./index", meta={'docno': 20, 'text': 4096})
    indexref1 = iter_indexer.index(docs)

A dataframe can also be used, virtue of its ``.to_dict()`` method::

    df = pd.DataFrame([['doc1', 'a b c']], columns=['docno', 'text'])
    iter_indexer = pt.IterDictIndexer("./index")
    indexref2 = indexer.index(df.to_dict(orient="records"))

However, the main power of using IterDictIndexer is for processing indefinite iterables, such as those returned by generator functions.
For example, the tsv file of the MSMARCO Passage Ranking corpus can be indexed as follows::

    dataset = pt.get_dataset("trec-deep-learning-passages")
    def msmarco_generate():
        with pt.io.autoopen(dataset.get_corpus()[0], 'rt') as corpusfile:
            for l in corpusfile:
                docno, passage = l.split("\t")
                yield {'docno' : docno, 'text' : passage}
    
    iter_indexer = pt.IterDictIndexer("./passage_index", meta={'docno': 20, 'text': 4096})
    indexref3 = iter_indexer.index(msmarco_generate())

IterDictIndexer can be used in connection with :ref:`indexing_pipelines`.

Similarly, indexing of JSONL files is similarly a few lines of Python::

    def iter_file(filename):
      import json
      with open(filename, 'rt') as file:
        for l in file:
          # assumes that each line contains 'docno', 'text' attributes
          # yields a dictionary for each json line 
          yield json.loads(l)

    indexref4 = pt.IterDictIndexer("./index", meta={'docno': 20, 'text': 4096}).index(iter_file("/path/to/file.jsonl"))
  
NB: Use ``pt.io.autoopen()`` as a drop-in replacement for ``open()`` that supports files compressed by gzip etc.

**Indexing TREC-formatted files using IterDictIndexer**

If you have TREC-formatted files that you wish to use with an IterDictIndexer-like indexer, ``pt.index.treccollection2textgen()`` can be used
as a helper function to aid in parsing such files.

.. autofunction:: pyterrier.terrier.treccollection2textgen

Example using Indexing Pipelines::

    files = pt.io.find_files("/path/to/Disk45")
    gen = pt.index.treccollection2textgen(files)
    indexer = pt.text.sliding() >> pt.IterDictIndexer("./index45")
    index = indexer.index(gen)

**Threading**

On UNIX-based systems, IterDictIndexer can also perform multi-threaded indexing::

    iter_indexer = pt.IterDictIndexer("./passage_index_8", meta={'docno': 20, 'text': 4096}, threads=8)
    indexref6 = iter_indexer.index(msmarco_generate())

Note that the resulting index ordering with multiple threads is non-deterministic; if you need 
deterministic behavior you must index in single-threaded mode. Furthermore, indexing can only go
as quickly as the document iterator, so to take full advantage of multi-threaded indexing, you 
will need to keep the iterator function light-weight. Many datasets provide a fast corpus iteration 
function (``get_corpus_iter()``), see more information in the :ref:`datasets`.

Indexing Configuration
======================

Our aim is to expose all conventional Terrier indexing configuration through PyTerrier, for instance as constructor arguments
to the Indexer classes. However, as Terrier is a legacy platform, some changes will take time to integrate into Terrier. 
Moreover, the manner of the configuration needed varies a little between the Indexer classes. In the following, we list common
indexing configurations, and how to apply them when indexing using PyTerrier, noting any differences betweeen the Indexer classes.

**Choice of Indexer**

Terrier has three different types of indexer. The choice of indexer is exposed using the ``type`` kwarg 
to the indexer class. The indexer type can be set using the ``IndexingType`` enum.

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.terrier.IndexingType
   :inherited-members: CLASSIC, SINGLEPASS, MEMORY

**Stemming configuation or stopwords**

The default Terrier indexing configuration is to apply an English stopword list, and Porter's stemmer. You can configure this using the ``stemmer`` and ``stopwords`` kwargs for the various indexers::

    indexer = pt.IterDictIndexer(stemmer='SpanishSnowballStemmer', stopwords=None)

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.terrier.TerrierStemmer
   :inherited-members: 

See also the `org.terrier.terms <http://terrier.org/docs/current/javadoc/org/terrier/terms/package-summary.html>`_ package for a list of 
the available term pipeline objects provided by Terrier.

Similarly the use of Terrier's English stopword list can be disabled using the ``stopwords`` kwarg.

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.terrier.TerrierStopwords
   :inherited-members: 

A custom stopword list can be set by setting the ``stopwords`` kwarg to a list of words::

    indexer = pt.IterDictIndexer("./index", stopwords=['a', 'an', 'the'])

**Languages and Tokenisation**

Similarly, the choice of tokeniser can be controlled in the indexer constructor using the ``tokeniser`` kwarg. 
`EnglishTokeniser <http://terrier.org/docs/current/javadoc/org/terrier/indexing/tokenisation/EnglishTokeniser.html>`_ is the 
default tokeniser. Other tokenisers are listed in  `org.terrier.indexing.tokenisation <http://terrier.org/docs/current/javadoc/org/terrier/indexing/tokenisation/package-summary.html>`_ 
package. For instance, its common to use `UTFTokeniser` when indexing non-English text::

    indexer = pt.IterDictIndexer(stemmer=None, stopwords=None, tokeniser="UTFTokeniser")

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.terrier.TerrierTokeniser
   :inherited-members: 


**Positions (aka blocks)** 

All indexer classes expose a `blocks` boolean constructor argument to allow position information to be recoreded in the index. Defaults to False, i.e. positions are not recorded.


**Fields**

Fields refers to storing the frequency of a terms occurrence in different parts of a document, e.g. title vs. body vs. anchor text.

IterDictIndexer can be configured to record fields by setting the ``fields=True`` kwarg to the constructor. For instance, if we have two different fields to a document::

    docs = [ {'docno' : 'd1', 'title': 'This is the title', 'text' : 'This is the main document']
    indexref = pt.IterDictIndexer("./index_fields", text_attrs=['text', 'title'], fields=True).index(docs)
    index = pt.IndexFactory.of(indexref)
    print(index.getCollectionStatistics().getNumberOfFields()) # will print 2
    # make a BM25F retriever, places twice as much weight on the title as the main body
    bm25 = pt.terrier.Retriever(index, wmodel='BM25F', controls={'w.0' = 1, 'w.1' = 2, 'c.0' = 0.75, 'c.1' = 0.5})

See the Terrier `indexing documentation on fields <https://github.com/terrier-org/terrier-core/blob/5.x/doc/configure_indexing.md#fields>`_ for more information. 

NB: Since PyTerrier 0.13, IterDictIndexer no longer records fields by default. This speeds up indexing and retrieval when field-based models such as BM25F are not required.

**Changing the tags parsed by TREC Collection** 

Use the relevant properties listed in the Terrier `indexing documentation <https://github.com/terrier-org/terrier-core/blob/5.x/doc/configure_indexing.md#basic-indexing-setup>`_.

**MetaIndex configuration** 

Metadata refers to the arbitrary strings associated to each document recorded in a Terrier index. These can range from the `"docno"` attribute of each document, as used to support experimentation, to other attributes such as the URL of the documents, or even the raw text of the document. Indeed, storing the raw text of each document is a trick often used when applying additional re-rankers such as BERT (see `pyterrier_bert <https://github.com/cmacdonald/pyterrier_bert>`_ for more information on integrating PyTerrier with BERT-based re-rankers). Indexers now expose `meta` and `meta_tags` constructor kwarg to make this easier.

**Reverse MetaIndex configuration** 

On occasion, there is a need to lookup up documents in a Terrier index based on their metadata, e.g. "docno". The `meta_reverse` constructor kwarg allows meta keys that support reverse lookup to be specified.


Pretokenised
============

Sometimes you want more fine-grained control over the tokenisation directly within PyTerrier. In this case, each document to be indexed can contain a dictionary of pre-tokenised text and their counts. This works if the `pretokenised` flag is set to True at indexing time::

    iter_indexer = pt.IterDictIndexer("./pretokindex", meta={'docno': 20}, threads=1, pretokenised=True)
    indexref6 = iter_indexer.index([
        {'docno' : 'd1', 'toks' : {'a' : 1, '##2' : 2}},
        {'docno' : 'd2', 'toks' : {'a' : 2, '##2' : 1}}
    ])

This allows tokenisation using, for instance, the `HuggingFace tokenizers <https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/fast_tokenizers>`_::

    iter_indexer = pt.IterDictIndexer("./pretokindex", meta={'docno': 20}, pretokenised=True)
    from transformers import AutoTokenizer
    from collections import Counter

    tok = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("bert-base-uncased")

    # This creates a new column called 'toks', where each row contains 
    # a dictionary of the BERT WordPiece tokens of the 'text' column.
    # This simple example tokenises one row at a time, this could be  
    # made more efficient to utilise batching support in the tokeniser. 
    token_row_apply = pt.apply.toks(lambda row: Counter(tok.tokenize(row['text'])))

    index_pipe = token_row_apply >> iter_indexer
    indexref = index_pipe.index([
        {'docno' : 'd1', 'text' : 'do goldfish grow?'},
        {'docno' : 'd2', 'text' : ''}
    ])

At retrieval time, WordPieces that contain special characters (e.g. `'##w'` `'[SEP]'`) need to be encoded so as to avoid Terrier's tokeniser. 
We use ``pt.rewrite.tokenise()`` to apply a tokeniser to the query, setting ``matchop`` to True, such that ``pt.terrier.Retriever.matchop()`` 
is called to ensure that rewritten query terms are properly encoded::

    br = pt.terrier.Retriever(indexref)
    tok = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("bert-base-uncased")
    query_toks = pt.rewrite.tokenise(tok.tokenize, matchop=True)
    retr_pipe = query_toks >> br
