docs/transformer.rst, before:

PyTerrier transformers
----------------------

PyTerrier's retrieval architecture is based on three concepts:

 - dataframes with pre-defined types (each with a minimum set of known attributes), as detailed in the data amodel.
 - the *transformation* of those dataframes by standard information retrieval operations, defined as transformers.
 - the compsition of transformers, supported by the operators defined on transformers.

In essence, a PyTerrier transformer is a class with a transform() method, which takes as input a dataframe, and changes it,
before returning it.

+-------+---------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+
+ Input | Output  | Cardinality | Example          | Concrete Transformer Example |
+=======+=========+=============+==================+==============================+
|   Q   |    Q    |   1 to 1    | Query rewriting  | `pt.rewrite.SDM()`           |
+-------+---------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+
|   Q   |  Q x D  |   1 to N    | Retrieval        | `pt.BatchRetrieve()`         |
+-------+---------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+
| Q x D |    Q    |   N to 1    | Query expansion  | `pt.rewrite.RM3()`           |
+-------+---------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+
| Q x D |  Q x D  |   1 to 1    | Re-ranking       | `pt.apply.doc_score()`       |
+-------+---------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+
| Q x D |  Q x Df |   1 to 1    | Feature scoring  | `pt.FeaturesBatchRetrieve()` |
+-------+---------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+

Transformer base classes
========================

TransformerBase
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This class is the base class for all transformers.

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.transformer.TransformerBase
    :members:

Moreover, by extending TransformerBase, all transformer implementations gain the necessary "dunder" methods (e.g. `__rshift__()`)
to support the transformer operators (`>>`, `+` etc). 

EstimatorBase
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This class exposes a fit() method that can be used for transformers that can be trained.

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.transformer.EstimatorBase
    :members:

Internal transformers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A singificant number of transformers are defined in pyterrier.transformer to implement operators etc. Its is not expected
to use these directly but they are documented for completeness.

+--------+------------------+---------------------------+
| Symbol | Name             | Implementing transformer  |
+========+==================+===========================+
| `>>`   | compose/then     | ComposedPipeline          |
+--------+------------------+---------------------------+
| `|`    | set-union        | SetUnionTransformer       |
+--------+------------------+---------------------------+
| `&`    | set-intersection | SetIntersectionTransformer|
+--------+------------------+---------------------------+
| `+`    | linear           | CombSumTransformer        | 
+--------+------------------+---------------------------+
| `+`    | scalar-product   | ScalarProductTransformer  | 
+--------+------------------+---------------------------+
| `%`    | rank-cutoff      | RankCutoffTransformer     |
+--------+------------------+---------------------------+
| `%`    | feature-union    | FeatureUnionPipeline      |
+--------+------------------+---------------------------+
| `^`    | concatenate      | ConcatenateTransformer    |
+--------+------------------+---------------------------+
| `~`    | cache            | ChestCacheTransformer     |
+--------+------------------+---------------------------+


Writing your own transformer
============================

The first step to writing your own transformer for your own code is to consider the type of change being applied.
Several common transformations are supported through the functions in the :ref:`pyterrier.apply` module. See the 
:ref:`pyterrier.apply` documentation.

However, if your transformer has state, such as an expensive model to be loaded at startup time, you may want to 
extend TransformerBase directly. 

Here are some hints for using Transformers:

 - If you return ranked results, use `pt.model.add_ranks()` to add the rank column.

Commit message:

some renaming and moving around

docs/transformer.rst, after:

PyTerrier Transformers
----------------------

PyTerrier's retrieval architecture is based on three concepts:

 - dataframes with pre-defined types (each with a minimum set of known attributes), as detailed in the data amodel.
 - the *transformation* of those dataframes by standard information retrieval operations, defined as transformers.
 - the compsition of transformers, supported by the operators defined on transformers.

In essence, a PyTerrier transformer is a class with a transform() method, which takes as input a dataframe, and changes it,
before returning it.

+-------+---------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+
+ Input | Output  | Cardinality | Example          | Concrete Transformer Example |
+=======+=========+=============+==================+==============================+
|   Q   |    Q    |   1 to 1    | Query rewriting  | `pt.rewrite.SDM()`           |
+-------+---------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+
|   Q   |  Q x D  |   1 to N    | Retrieval        | `pt.BatchRetrieve()`         |
+-------+---------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+
| Q x D |    Q    |   N to 1    | Query expansion  | `pt.rewrite.RM3()`           |
+-------+---------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+
| Q x D |  Q x D  |   1 to 1    | Re-ranking       | `pt.apply.doc_score()`       |
+-------+---------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+
| Q x D |  Q x Df |   1 to 1    | Feature scoring  | `pt.FeaturesBatchRetrieve()` |
+-------+---------+-------------+------------------+------------------------------+

Optimisation
============

Some operators applied to transformer can be optimised by the underlying search engine - for instance, cutting a ranking 
earlier. So while the following two pipelines are semantically equivalent, the latter might be more efficient::

    pipe1 = BatchRetrieve(index, "BM25") % 10
    pipe2 = pipe1.compile()

Fitting
=======
When fit() is called on a pipeline, all estimators (transformer that also have a `fit()` method, as specified by 
`EstimatorBase`) are fitted, in turn. This allows one (or more) stages of learning to be integrated into a retrieval
pipeline.

Transformer base classes
========================

TransformerBase
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This class is the base class for all transformers.

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.transformer.TransformerBase
    :members:

Moreover, by extending TransformerBase, all transformer implementations gain the necessary "dunder" methods (e.g. `__rshift__()`)
to support the transformer operators (`>>`, `+` etc). 

EstimatorBase
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This class exposes a fit() method that can be used for transformers that can be trained.

.. autoclass:: pyterrier.transformer.EstimatorBase
    :members:

Internal transformers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A singificant number of transformers are defined in pyterrier.transformer to implement operators etc. Its is not expected
to use these directly but they are documented for completeness.

+--------+------------------+---------------------------+
| Symbol | Name             | Implementing transformer  |
+========+==================+===========================+
| `>>`   | compose/then     | ComposedPipeline          |
+--------+------------------+---------------------------+
| `|`    | set-union        | SetUnionTransformer       |
+--------+------------------+---------------------------+
| `&`    | set-intersection | SetIntersectionTransformer|
+--------+------------------+---------------------------+
| `+`    | linear           | CombSumTransformer        | 
+--------+------------------+---------------------------+
| `+`    | scalar-product   | ScalarProductTransformer  | 
+--------+------------------+---------------------------+
| `%`    | rank-cutoff      | RankCutoffTransformer     |
+--------+------------------+---------------------------+
| `%`    | feature-union    | FeatureUnionPipeline      |
+--------+------------------+---------------------------+
| `^`    | concatenate      | ConcatenateTransformer    |
+--------+------------------+---------------------------+
| `~`    | cache            | ChestCacheTransformer     |
+--------+------------------+---------------------------+


Writing your own transformer
============================

The first step to writing your own transformer for your own code is to consider the type of change being applied.
Several common transformations are supported through the functions in the :ref:`pyterrier.apply` module. See the 
:ref:`pyterrier.apply` documentation.

However, if your transformer has state, such as an expensive model to be loaded at startup time, you may want to 
extend TransformerBase directly. 

Here are some hints for using Transformers:

 - If you return ranked results, use `pt.model.add_ranks()` to add the rank column.


## Fitting

When fit() is called on a pipeline, all estimators (transformer that also have a fit()) method, as specified by EstimatorBase) are fitted in turn.
